Chapter 7, Glasgow. General strikes, workers and tanks.
Strikes were also a massive problem for David Lloyd George in 1919.
Some of those strikes were very, very significant, but there was a great number of strikes.
The general strike in Glasgow started with racist violence.
On the 23rd of January, Emmanuel Shinwell, then leader of the Glasgow branch of the Seafarers Union
and chairman of the Gladdow Trades and Labour Council, told a meeting of 600 white merchant-sail Navy sailors
that the reason they were finding it hard to find work was because of cheap Chinese labour.
Later that day, sailors were waiting at the Mercantile Marine offices, hoping to sign on for a ship.
There was a large group of white sailors and about 30 Sierra Leone seamen.
This was the Brumelor riot, the first of the race riots in 2019.
The 30 Sierra Leone men were chased to 118 Brumelor Street, a lodging house,
where hundreds of merchant seamen attacked the house.
But the men fought back and two attackers were injured, one stabbed, one shot.
Sierra Leone seamen David Samuel and Tom Johnson were arrested for attempted murder.
In an interview later, Shinwell blamed the black men for taking jobs.
Strikes were happening all over Glasgow, and on the 27th of January,
the strike committee decided to announce a general strike.
Flying pickets were sent to those places not yet on strike.
Many of those pickets were ex-servicemen, some still in army grey coats.
All of Clydeside was involved and miners in Stirlingshire.
At first, the police were used to intimidate the strikers and drive them off the streets.
But on Bloody Friday, January 31st, fighting broke out at a rally in George Square.
What sparked off the fight is unclear, although it's generally attributed to the police trying to stop a tram from being immobilised,
a technique that was being used by the strikers.
In any case, the police had orders to use their batons that day.
And if the tramway incident had not provided a justification for their attack, then another pretext would have been found.
Trade union leader Gallagher describes the attack.
Suddenly, without warning of any kind, a signal was given,
and the police made a savage and totally unexpected assault on the rear of the meeting,
smashing right and left with their batons, utterly regardless of whom or what they hit.
With brutal ferocity, they made their onslaught on defenceless workers.
But the police got more than they bargained for that day.
Pitch battles took place in the square and the surrounded streets.
Charge after charge by the police was driven off under a hail of bricks and bottles until the police were forced to retreat.
The government now sent in the army.
And literally, the government had hesitated to take this step because of fear of possible mutiny,
because the army itself was not properly under their control.
At a meeting of the War Cabinet held January 30th,
General Charles had pointed out in the pre-war years we had a well-disciplined and ignorant army,
whereas we now have an army educated and ill-disciplined.
An interesting quote.
But the defeat of the police put an end to the government's hesitation.
Thousands of troops, fully equipped, poured into Glasgow late on the night of Bloody Friday and early Saturday morning.
Accompanied by heavy munitions wagons, the general appearance of long columns of khaki-led men suggest that at least the government is in earnest in the measures to crush the new revolutionary spirit,
wrote the Glasgow Evening News.
Howitzers were positioned in the city chambers.
The cattle market was transformed into a tank depot.
Machine guns were posted on the top of hotels.
And the main post office and armed troops stood sentry outside power stations and patrolled the streets.
Apart from preparing new laws, the government also used the existing ones to carry out a decision made at the War Cabinet meeting of June 31st.
They arrested the strike leaders to weaken the strike movement.
The next day, union leaders Gallacher and Kirkwood were arrested while trying to stop the fighting in George Square.
And in the following days, the rioting was used as an excuse to pick up other leaders, including Shinwell.
Everett, the National Secretary of the Marxist-British Socialist Party, and Hopkins, Glasgow's Secretary of the Amalgamated Society of Engineers.
The press, supporting the government, jumped on board.
The Glasgow Herald put the strike down to the clap-trap nonsense of Trotsky and the studious inculcation of the temper of revolt.
And described its leaders as a gang of political revolutionaries who have contrived to exploit the industrial weariness of Scottish workers, notorious rebels against the social order.
Terrorism on the Clyde proclaimed one headline in the Scotsman.
And Glasgow Bolshevism, disgraceful scenes, proclaimed another in the Evening News.
Over an article which claims the troops have been sent in to protect life and property from the rebel.
The Glasgow strike was broken and the strike leaders were all taken to court after tanks and howitzers in the main square and across Glasgow.
The central argument for the strike was the workers wanted a reduction not from 54 to 47 hours a week as the trade union congress had agreed with government, but down to a 40 hour week.
And the reason they wanted a 40 hour week was to ensure that more unemployed people would be in work.